\" Man page for bus pub/sub functions
.TH HIVE_BUS 3 "January 2025" "ACRT 1.0" "Actor Runtime Manual"
.SH NAME
hive_bus_create, hive_bus_destroy, hive_bus_publish, hive_bus_subscribe, hive_bus_unsubscribe, hive_bus_read, hive_bus_read_wait, hive_bus_entry_count \- publish-subscribe bus
.SH SYNOPSIS
.nf
.B #include <hive_bus.h>
.PP
.BI "hive_status hive_bus_create(const hive_bus_config *" cfg ", bus_id *" out ");"
.BI "hive_status hive_bus_destroy(bus_id " bus ");"
.BI "hive_status hive_bus_publish(bus_id " bus ", const void *" data ", size_t " len ");"
.BI "hive_status hive_bus_subscribe(bus_id " bus ");"
.BI "hive_status hive_bus_unsubscribe(bus_id " bus ");"
.BI "hive_status hive_bus_read(bus_id " bus ", void *" buf ", size_t " max_len ", size_t *" bytes_read ");"
.BI "hive_status hive_bus_read_wait(bus_id " bus ", void *" buf ", size_t " max_len ","
.BI "                               size_t *" bytes_read ", int32_t " timeout_ms ");"
.BI "size_t hive_bus_entry_count(bus_id " bus ");"
.fi
.SH DESCRIPTION
These functions implement a publish-subscribe message bus for broadcasting data to
multiple subscribers. Unlike point-to-point IPC, bus entries can be read by multiple
actors independently.
.SS Bus Configuration
Buses are created with a configuration structure:
.PP
.nf
typedef struct {
    uint8_t  max_subscribers;     /* 1..32 concurrent subscribers */
    uint8_t  consume_after_reads; /* remove after N reads, 0 = keep */
    uint32_t max_age_ms;          /* expire after ms, 0 = no expiry */
    size_t   max_entries;         /* ring buffer capacity */
    size_t   max_entry_size;      /* max payload bytes per entry */
} hive_bus_config;

#define HIVE_BUS_CONFIG_DEFAULT { \\
    .max_subscribers = 32, \\
    .consume_after_reads = 0, \\
    .max_age_ms = 0, \\
    .max_entries = 16, \\
    .max_entry_size = 256 \\
}
.fi
.SS Creating and Destroying Buses
.BR hive_bus_create ()
creates a new bus with the specified configuration. The bus ID is stored in
.IR out .
.PP
.BR hive_bus_destroy ()
destroys a bus. This fails if any subscribers remain; all actors must unsubscribe
first.
.SS Publishing Data
.BR hive_bus_publish ()
publishes
.I len
bytes from
.I data
to the bus. The data is copied to the bus ring buffer. All current subscribers can
read this entry independently.
.PP
When the ring buffer is full, the oldest entry is
.B automatically evicted
to make room. This differs from IPC, which returns
.B HIVE_ERR_NOMEM
instead.
.SS Subscribing and Unsubscribing
.BR hive_bus_subscribe ()
subscribes the calling actor to the bus. New subscribers start reading from the
current head position (they do not see entries published before subscribing).
.PP
.BR hive_bus_unsubscribe ()
removes the calling actor's subscription.
.SS Reading Data
.BR hive_bus_read ()
reads the next unread entry into
.IR buf .
At most
.I max_len
bytes are copied. The actual number of bytes read is stored in
.IR bytes_read .
Each subscriber maintains independent read position; reading does not affect
other subscribers.
.PP
.BR hive_bus_read_wait ()
is the blocking variant. The
.I timeout_ms
parameter controls blocking:
.TP
.B 0
Return immediately with
.B HIVE_ERR_WOULDBLOCK
if no data.
.TP
.B positive value
Block up to the specified milliseconds.
.TP
.B -1
Block forever until data is available.
.SS Retention Policies
.TP
.B consume_after_reads
When non-zero, entries are automatically removed after being read by this many
subscribers. Use for work-queue patterns where each entry should be processed
once by any subscriber.
.TP
.B max_age_ms
When non-zero, entries older than this are automatically expired. Use for
time-sensitive data like sensor readings.
.SS Querying Bus State
.BR hive_bus_entry_count ()
returns the number of valid entries currently in the bus ring buffer.
.SH RETURN VALUE
Functions returning
.I hive_status
indicate success when
.I status.code
is
.BR HIVE_OK .
.PP
.BR hive_bus_entry_count ()
returns the entry count, or 0 if the bus is invalid.
.SH ERRORS
.TP
.B HIVE_ERR_INVALID
Invalid bus ID, NULL arguments, not called from actor context, not subscribed
(for read/unsubscribe), already subscribed (for subscribe), or bus has active
subscribers (for destroy).
.TP
.B HIVE_ERR_NOMEM
Message data pool exhausted (for publish) or subscriber table full (for subscribe).
.TP
.B HIVE_ERR_WOULDBLOCK
No data available and timeout was 0 (for
.BR hive_bus_read ()).
.TP
.B HIVE_ERR_TIMEOUT
No data received within timeout period (for
.BR hive_bus_read_wait ()).
.SH NOTES
.SS Bus vs IPC
Use bus for:
.IP \(bu 2
One-to-many communication (broadcast)
.IP \(bu 2
Sensor data streams (multiple consumers)
.IP \(bu 2
Event notification (multiple listeners)
.IP \(bu 2
Work queues (with consume_after_reads=1)
.PP
Use IPC for:
.IP \(bu 2
Point-to-point communication
.IP \(bu 2
Request/reply patterns
.IP \(bu 2
Guaranteed delivery (IPC never drops)
.SS Ring Buffer Eviction
When the ring buffer is full,
.BR hive_bus_publish ()
automatically evicts the oldest entry. This is
.B different from IPC
which returns
.B HIVE_ERR_NOMEM
and never drops messages. Design subscribers to keep up with publishers; slow
readers will miss messages.
.SS Subscriber Limit
Maximum 32 subscribers per bus (limited by uint32_t bitmask used internally for
tracking reads). The actual limit is min(32, HIVE_MAX_BUS_SUBSCRIBERS).
.SS New Subscriber Read Position
When an actor subscribes, its read position starts at the current head. It will
not see entries published before subscribing. To capture all entries, subscribe
before any publishing begins.
.SS Automatic Cleanup
When an actor dies, all its bus subscriptions are automatically removed. When a
bus is destroyed, all its entries are freed.
.SS Pool Exhaustion
Bus shares the message data pool with IPC (HIVE_MESSAGE_DATA_POOL_SIZE). Heavy
bus usage can starve IPC and vice versa. Size pools appropriately for your
application's communication patterns.
.SS Embedded Considerations
.IP \(bu 2
Zero heap allocation (static ring buffers and subscriber arrays)
.IP \(bu 2
O(1) publish, O(n) read scan (n = entry count)
.IP \(bu 2
Deterministic memory: ring buffer size × entry size per bus
.IP \(bu 2
Wake-on-publish: blocked readers resume immediately when data arrives
.IP \(bu 2
Microsecond timestamps for max_age_ms (gettimeofday on Linux, hardware timer on STM32)
.SH EXAMPLE
.SS Sensor Broadcast
.nf
#include <hive_runtime.h>
#include <hive_bus.h>
#include <stdio.h>

typedef struct {
    float temperature;
    float humidity;
} sensor_data;

bus_id sensor_bus;

void sensor_publisher(void *arg) {
    (void)arg;
    sensor_data data = {25.0f, 60.0f};

    for (int i = 0; i < 5; i++) {
        data.temperature += 0.5f;
        hive_bus_publish(sensor_bus, &data, sizeof(data));
        printf("Published: temp=%.1f, humidity=%.1f\\n",
               data.temperature, data.humidity);
    }

    hive_exit();
}

void display_actor(void *arg) {
    (void)arg;
    hive_bus_subscribe(sensor_bus);

    for (int i = 0; i < 5; i++) {
        sensor_data data;
        size_t len;
        hive_status s = hive_bus_read_wait(sensor_bus, &data, sizeof(data),
                                           &len, 5000);
        if (HIVE_FAILED(s)) {
            printf("Read failed: %s\\n", HIVE_ERR_STR(s));
            break;
        }
        printf("Display: temp=%.1f\\n", data.temperature);
    }

    hive_bus_unsubscribe(sensor_bus);
    hive_exit();
}

void logger_actor(void *arg) {
    (void)arg;
    hive_bus_subscribe(sensor_bus);

    for (int i = 0; i < 5; i++) {
        sensor_data data;
        size_t len;
        hive_status s = hive_bus_read_wait(sensor_bus, &data, sizeof(data),
                                           &len, 5000);
        if (HIVE_FAILED(s)) break;
        printf("Logger: recorded temp=%.1f at tick %d\\n",
               data.temperature, i);
    }

    hive_bus_unsubscribe(sensor_bus);
    hive_exit();
}

int main(void) {
    hive_init();

    /* Create bus with 100ms expiry */
    hive_bus_config cfg = HIVE_BUS_CONFIG_DEFAULT;
    cfg.max_age_ms = 100;
    hive_bus_create(&cfg, &sensor_bus);

    actor_id pub, disp, log;
    hive_spawn(display_actor, NULL, &disp);
    hive_spawn(logger_actor, NULL, &log);
    hive_spawn(sensor_publisher, NULL, &pub);

    hive_run();
    hive_bus_destroy(sensor_bus);
    hive_cleanup();
    return 0;
}
.fi
.SS Work Queue Pattern
.nf
/* Use consume_after_reads=1 for work queue semantics */
hive_bus_config cfg = HIVE_BUS_CONFIG_DEFAULT;
cfg.consume_after_reads = 1;  /* Entry removed after first read */
cfg.max_entries = 64;         /* Queue depth */
hive_bus_create(&cfg, &work_queue);

/* Multiple workers subscribe; each job processed exactly once */
.fi
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR hive_ipc (3),
.BR hive_spawn (3),
.BR hive_types (3)
